+++
title = 'On Atomic Habit'
date = 2024-05-16T23:23:31+02:00
description = "In which I explore the transformative insights of James Clear's Atomic Habits, discussing habit formation, system over goals, and identity-based change."
image = "img/posts/on-atomic-habit/img01.jpg"
+++

After a period of silence, I'm back to fulfill the promise I made to myself in
my previous blog – to keep writing here. Hope you're doing well!

So, I recently finished reading James Clear's "Atomic Habits", a book that had
been on my reading list for some time. Although I initially began reading it
last year and couldn't finish, I'm glad I picked up the book again and read it
through to the end. 

Habit is always an interesting topic to discuss as it can lead us to good or bad
outcomes. In this blog, I summarize some of the key points from the book,
starting with what habits are and the four stages of habit formation. We'll
discuss how we should focus on the system rather than the goal, how to shift our
approach to identity-based habit, the power of repetition, and finally, how to
tackle boredom. Without further ado, let’s jump in!

## What is habit and how it is formed

Habit is a form of routine behavior that comes automatically due to frequent
repetition. The habit formation, either good or bad, stem from the 4 stages of
habit loop: cue, craving, response, and reward. To understand this concept, we
must recognize that all of our behavior stems from the pursuit of a reward (such
as pleasure or satisfaction). 

According to the book, a cue is the trigger when we notice the opportunity for a
reward, craving is the desire or motivational force for the reward, response is
the action we take to obtain the reward or the habit itself, and reward is the
positive result that ultimately satisfies our craving. To simplify, let's
consider this example:

![](/img/posts/on-atomic-habit/img01.jpg)

+ **Cue:** the smell of fresh-baked chocolate muffin at the train station during
  your commute to work
+ **Craving:** you start to crave a muffin
+ **Response:** you buy the muffin
+ **Reward:** Eating the muffin brings satisfaction, and buying it becomes
  associated with your commute to the office

In this case, when the reward is achieved, the habit cycle is completed.
Eventually, our brain will learn to associate the cue with the reward, leading
to the continuation of the loop and the subconscious formation of a habit.

When it comes to creating a good habit or breaking a bad habit, we must focus on
these four steps of habit formation by either reinforcing each element of the
loop or eliminating one of them.

How to create good habits and break the bad ones:

![](/img/posts/on-atomic-habit/img02.jpg)

## Do not focus on goals but focus on the system instead 

One proposed idea in this book is that people often repeat bad habits not
because they don’t want to change, but because they have the wrong system for
change. We tend to focus merely on goals, while the goals themselves are
temporary. Instead, we should aim to create a system for achieving those goals,
focusing on the process that leads to those results.

The author itself stated: “Your goal is your desired outcome. Your system is the
collection of daily habits that will get you there.”

Just like any other journey toward improvement, there are no shortcuts to our
goals, and it is better to improve by 1% each day rather than remain stuck in
place. While this tiny progress may not appear significant at first, over time,
these daily habits will compound and lead to the achievement of our goals.

## Identity based habit

Another compelling concept I found is the idea of establishing habits based on
identity. Instead of merely focusing on the results or goals themselves, we
should shift our approach to who we want to be. Let’s put it simple: instead of
saying "I want to publish a book," try "I want to be the type of person who
writes my thoughts every day." 

This may sound insignificant, but in my opinion, most of the time, the reason
why we don’t reach our goals is because emotional barriers hold us back. We tend
to construct negative self-perceptions, accepting them as truths. For instance,
we might believe "I am bad at writing." As Oscar Wilde said: "To define is to
limit.” This will finally become our excuse to not improve our potential.

On the contrary, when we align our identity with our goals, the habits
themselves lead to the objectives we want to achieve. In my personal experience,
this eventually leads to the system for achieving our goals. For example, in
order to write effectively, I should read at least one book per month. This
aligns with my identity: I am the type of person who reads for at least 30
minutes every day.

## When quantity is better than quality: the power of repetition 

There is one interesting story shared from this book about a professor in
University of Florida, named Jerry Uelsmann who divided his photography students
into two groups. One group was assigned to produce as many photos as they could
and they will be graded by the quantity of photos they produced. Meanwhile, the
other group was tasked with producing only one photo, graded on the quality or
excellence of the photo. Can you guess which group produced the best photos? It
turns out all the best photos were produced by the quantity group.

In this case, we can observe that the quality group students were aiming for
perfection, speculating on how to produce the best photo without really taking
action, while the quantity group students was experimenting and learning by
taking as many photos as possible, and along the process, they improve their
skills. This illustrates the difference between being in motion and taking
action. I believe this is especially true for perfectionists like myself; we
often feel like we are making progress by planning and strategizing, but in
reality, we are merely delaying failure without taking concrete action. As Clear
stated on his book: “The key to mastering a habit is to start with repetition,
not perfection”.

## Finally: on how we should fall in love with boredom

One insight that may sound familiar to us, but we may not fully realize, is that
the greatest threat to success is not failure but rather boredom. All of us want
habits that last in the long run. However, once the habit becomes a routine, it
becomes less interesting and less satisfying, and we become bored. It’s easy for
us to quit rather than to be consistent.

I think this is when discipline takes over. We need to remember the reason why
we started our habit in the first place, while also taking a break if necessary.
Doing repetition over and over again while looking forward to improvement may
also be useful.

Knowing something isn't enjoyable but understanding its benefits for your own
sake can serve as motivation and a reminder when life gets in the way.

Simple motivation of not breaking the chain can also be helpful, as was the case
for me. I remember when I studied German on Duolingo, I managed to keep it up
for 365 days, even if I could only spare a few minutes on certain days. I
managed to be consistent and that is the key.

Boredom may also stem from an activity being too easy, and we might just need a
bit of challenge that is still manageable. I once wrote a blog about Flow. The
idea of flow is to find an activity that is both challenging and enjoyable,
allowing for complete focus and absorption, while still offering opportunities
for growth and development. Finally, it’s also important to find a balance
between difficulty and challenge, as a task that is too easy can result in
boredom, and one that is too hard may cause anxiety.

![](/img/posts/on-atomic-habit/img03.jpg)

To conclude this blog, I'd like to share a quote from Aristotle:

> We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, therefore, is not an act but a habit.